Gnuplot tools for DIVA
Version 1.0

January 14, 2008

This is a quick guide to use gnuplot to prepare basic pictures of the analysis
with DIVA.


Installation:
• put the most recent forgnuplot*.f files into directory src/Fortran/Util
• put the most recent gnuwork directory content into directory divastripped
• put the most recent divagnu into directory divastripped
These three operations are automatically performed if you place yourself in di-
rectory diva-x.y.z. and unzip diva-gnuplot.zip (or untar diva-gnuplot.tar).
Then
• compile DIVA (divacompile in directory src/Fortran) or only forgnuplot*.f
(make sure the binaries forgnuplot*.a are in diva-x.y.z/bin and have
the permission 755)
• in directory gnuwork, edit divaplotall and change the line related to the
executable gplot=c:/JMB/gnuplot/bin/wgnuplot.exe so that it points
to the gnuplot executable of your system (often gnuplot in a Linux system
if the PATH is set correctly or wgnuplot.exe on a windows system)


Batch use: when in divastripped, the execution of divagnu will prepare
all plots (defined by diva * in ./gnuwork). The plots obtained are placed
in ./gnuwork/plots, using default values for plotting ranges and projections.
Previously existing plots are erased.
To override defaults, you can do the following:
• To apply a plotting range for the analysed fields between 34 and 36 for
example, just execute divagnu 34 36
• To change the threshold for masking the analysis based on the error field,
create a threshold.dat file in ./gnuwork, containing a single value. This
1
value is a fraction of the variance of the background field. When the error
is above this threshold, the plot is masked. Example: a value of 0.01 in
threshold.dat and a VARBAK value of 10 will lead to a mask whenever
the error variance is larger than 0.1. Without a threshold.dat file, the
default is a fraction of 0.5 (i.e. a 50% error on the anomaly).
• When icoordchange is 1 or 2, a projection is plotted, with a refer-
ence longitude (longref) based on the analysis grid. If you place a file
longref.dat into ./gnuwork containing the single value of your desired
reference longitude, the projection will take this value rather then the
default one.
• To use other color palettes than the default ones: go into ./gnuwork;
copy analysis.pal.default into analysis.pal and edit the latter for
your needs. Similarly error.pal.default, which is taken for error plots,
can also be customized by creating an error.pal. It is better to create
your own .pal files instead of modifying the default palettes, because in
case you install a new version of the gnuplot tools, default palettes will be
reinstalled with the new version, whereas customized palettes remain.
• To change output from .png format to postscript, edit divaplotall found
in ./gnuwork and change the line DRIVER=png to DRIVER=ps (you can do
similar changes for other formats by adapting the script (search for DRIVER
in divaplotall)
• For more complicated customization, you need to edit divaplotall and
adapt it to your needs, saving it before an update of the present gnuplot
tools is installed.


Interactive use: If you run gnuplot interactively, you can run most of the
plotting tools by executing commands similar to load diva mesh from within
gnuplot, applying adequate zrange, cbrange and palette commands before a
replot. (You can look at how the batch processing divaplotall creates the
files fead into gnuplot).
Useful commands in gnuplot to customize your plots or work interactively
are
• set palette rgbformulae 33,13,10 to change colorbars
• or set palette defined ( 0 "blue", 0.7 "green", 1 "yellow", 2 "red"
) ; here for a matlab type colorbar
• set cbrange[34:36.5] to set range for colorbar
• set xrange[30:180] to set window on x
• set yrange[10:40] to set window on y
• set xtics autofreq makes default axes
2
• replot after definition of new ranges etc, replots the picture
• to save an image (here in postscript)
set terminal postscript landscape color
set output ’mypicture.eps’
replot
• to go back to screen output
set terminal windows (or x11 for Linux-X11 or AquaTerm for Mac
OSX)
set output
• when using diva analysis mask interactively, once finished execute
unset zrange
set pm3d clip1in
• When moving from a colored map to line plots: unset pm3d
